MDM Custom settings (profiles) - API changes (#14230)
fleetdm/fleet: docs/REST API/rest-api.md

      "enrollment_status": null,
      "name": "",
      "server_url": null,

>       "os_settings": {

Reviewer: Hmm, this would be a breaking change. Which we could do but we have to be really intentional about it (check in w/ customers and users).

Also, I think we might have adding `os_settings` in addition to `macos_settings` in the BitLocker story: #12577 

If that's true, while it's not ideal to have 2 properties with duplicate information, I think we leave it as is.

Author: Agree.

      },
      "profiles": [
        {
          "profile_id": 998,
          "name": "profile1",
          "platform": "darwin",
          "status": "verifying",
          "operation_type": "install",
          "detail": ""
        },
        {
          "profile_id": 999,
          "name": "profile2",

>           "platform": "windows",

Author: @noahtalerman Good point. We don't need a platform here.

      },
      "profiles": [
        {

>           "profile_uuid": 954ec5ea-a334-4825-87b3-937e7e381f24,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
          "profile_uuid": "954ec5ea-a334-4825-87b3-937e7e381f24",
```

      },
      "profiles": [
        {

>           "profile_uuid": 954ec5ea-a334-4825-87b3-937e7e381f24,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
          "profile_uuid": "954ec5ea-a334-4825-87b3-937e7e381f24",
```

      },
      "profiles": [
        {

>           "profile_uuid": 954ec5ea-a334-4825-87b3-937e7e381f24,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
          "profile_uuid": "954ec5ea-a334-4825-87b3-937e7e381f24",
```

  "host_id": 8,
  "profiles": [
    {

>       "profile_uuid": bc84dae7-396c-4e10-9d45-5768bce8b8bd,

Reviewer 2: This should be a string right?
```suggestion
      "profile_uuid": "bc84dae7-396c-4e10-9d45-5768bce8b8bd",
```

- [Delete an EULA file](#delete-an-eula-file)
- [Download an EULA file](#download-an-eula-file)

### Add custom setting (configuration profile)

Add a configuration profile to enforce custom settings on macOS and Windows hosts.

`POST /api/v1/fleet/mdm/profiles`

#### Parameters

| Name                      | Type     | In   | Description                                                                                                   |
| ------------------------- | -------- | ---- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | profile                   | file     | form | **Required.** The .mobileconfig or .xml file containing the profile.                                          |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| profile                   | file     | form | **Required.** The .mobileconfig (macOS) or .xml (Windows) file containing the profile.                                          |
```

I think we should be explicit here about which file is for which platform.

| team_id                   | string   | form | _Available in Fleet Premium_ The team id for the profile. If specified, the profile is applied to only hosts that are assigned to the specified team. If not specified, the profile is applied to only to hosts that are not assigned to any team.                         |

#### Example

> Add a new configuration profile to be applied to macOS and Windows hosts enrolled to Fleet's MDM that are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a new configuration profile to be applied to a macOS host
```

Looks like the example is just for macOS? See the `.mobileconfig` in the example.

- [Delete an EULA file](#delete-an-eula-file)
- [Download an EULA file](#download-an-eula-file)

### Add custom OS setting (configuration profile)

> > [Add custom macOS setting](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/ee02782eaf84c121256d73abc20b949d31bf2e57/docs/REST%20API/rest-api.md#add-custom-macos-setting-configuration-profile) (`POST /api/v1/fleet/mdm/apple/profiles`) API endpoint is deprecated as of Fleet 4.40. It is maintained for backwards compatibility. Please use the API endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [Add custom macOS setting](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/ee02782eaf84c121256d73abc20b949d31bf2e57/docs/REST%20API/rest-api.md#add-custom-macos-setting-configuration-profile) (`POST /api/v1/fleet/mdm/apple/profiles`) API endpoint is deprecated as of Fleet 4.41. It is maintained for backwards compatibility. Please use the below API endpoint instead.
```

###### Additional notes
If the response is `Status: 409 Conflict`, the body may include additional error details in the case
of duplicate payload display name or duplicate payload identifier (macOS profiles).

### List custom OS settings (configuration profiles)

> > [List custom macOS setting](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/ee02782eaf84c121256d73abc20b949d31bf2e57/docs/REST%20API/rest-api.md#list-custom-macos-settings-configuration-profiles) (`GET /api/v1/fleet/mdm/apple/profiles`) API endpoint is deprecated as of Fleet 4.40. It is maintained for backwards compatibility. Please use the API endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [List custom macOS setting](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/ee02782eaf84c121256d73abc20b949d31bf2e57/docs/REST%20API/rest-api.md#list-custom-macos-settings-configuration-profiles) (`GET /api/v1/fleet/mdm/apple/profiles`) API endpoint is deprecated as of Fleet 4.41. It is maintained for backwards compatibility. Please use the below API endpoint instead.
```

      "profile_id": 1337,
      "team_id": 0,
      "name": "Example profile",

>       "platform": "macOS",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      "platform": "darwin",
```

In the API, for the `platform` property, we use `darwin` for macOS. This is more of a historical thing. I think we should stay consistent.

See the host vitals response as an example: https://fleetdm.com/docs/rest-api/rest-api#get-host

      "identifier": "com.example.profile",
      "created_at": "2023-03-31T00:00:00Z",
      "updated_at": "2023-03-31T00:00:00Z",
      "checksum": "dGVzdAo="
    },
    {
      "profile_id": 1338,
      "team_id": 0,
      "name": "Example Windows profile",

>       "platform": "Windows",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      "platform": "windows",
```

In the API, we use lowercase `windows`. Also more of a historical thing we should try to stay consistent with.

{
  "profiles": [
    {
      "profile_uuid": 39f6cbbc-fe7b-4adc-b7a9-542d1af89c63,
      "team_id": 0,
      "name": "Example macOS profile",
      "platform": "darwin",
      "identifier": "com.example.profile",
      "created_at": "2023-03-31T00:00:00Z",
      "updated_at": "2023-03-31T00:00:00Z",
      "checksum": "dGVzdAo="
    },
    {
      "profile_uuid": f5ad01cc-f416-4b5f-88f3-a26da3b56a19,
      "team_id": 0,
      "name": "Example Windows profile",
      "platform": "windows",
      "created_at": "2023-04-31T00:00:00Z",
      "updated_at": "2023-04-31T00:00:00Z",
      "checksum": "aCLemVr)"
    }
  ],
  "meta": {
    "has_next_results": false,
    "has_previous_results": false
  }
}
```

### Get or download custom OS setting (configuration profile)

> > [Download custom macOS setting](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/ee02782eaf84c121256d73abc20b949d31bf2e57/docs/REST%20API/rest-api.md#download-custom-macos-setting-configuration-profile) (`GET /api/v1/fleet/mdm/apple/profiles/{profile_id}`) API endpoint is deprecated as of Fleet 4.41. It is maintained for backwards compatibility. Please use the below API endpoint instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> [Download custom macOS setting](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/ee02782eaf84c121256d73abc20b949d31bf2e57/docs/REST%20API/rest-api.md#download-custom-macos-setting-configuration-profile) (`GET /api/v1/fleet/mdm/apple/profiles/:profile_id`) API endpoint is deprecated as of Fleet 4.41. It is maintained for backwards compatibility. Please use the below API endpoint instead.
```

> `GET /api/v1/fleet/mdm/profiles/{profile_uuid}`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`GET /api/v1/fleet/mdm/profiles/:profile_uuid`
```

      "profile_id": 1337,
      "team_id": 0,
      "name": "Example profile",
      "platform": "darwin",
      "identifier": "com.example.profile",
      "created_at": "2023-03-31T00:00:00Z",
      "updated_at": "2023-03-31T00:00:00Z",
      "checksum": "dGVzdAo="
    },
    {
      "profile_id": 1338,
      "team_id": 0,
      "name": "Example Windows profile",
      "platform": "windows",
      "created_at": "2023-04-31T00:00:00Z",
      "updated_at": "2023-04-31T00:00:00Z",
      "checksum": "aCLemVr)"
    }
  ]
}
```

### Get or download custom OS setting (configuration profile)

> > [Download custom macOS setting](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/ee02782eaf84c121256d73abc20b949d31bf2e57/docs/REST%20API/rest-api.md#download-custom-macos-setting-configuration-profile) (`GET /api/v1/fleet/mdm/apple/profiles/{profile_id}`) API endpoint is deprecated as of Fleet 4.40. It is maintained for backwards compatibility. Please use the API endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [Download custom macOS setting](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/ee02782eaf84c121256d73abc20b949d31bf2e57/docs/REST%20API/rest-api.md#download-custom-macos-setting-configuration-profile) (`GET /api/v1/fleet/mdm/apple/profiles/{profile_id}`) API endpoint is deprecated as of Fleet 4.41. It is maintained for backwards compatibility. Please use the below API endpoint instead.
```

> `GET /api/v1/fleet/mdm/profiles/{profile_id}`

Reviewer: Do we use the `{profile_id}` format elsewhere in the docs? Or do we just use `{id}`. I think we want to be consistent here.

Author: Good point. Seems that we don't use this format anywhere else. For scripts and queries we use just `{id}`

#### Parameters

| Name                      | Type    | In    | Description                                             |
| ------------------------- | ------- | ----- | ------------------------------------------------------- |

> | id                        | integer | url   | **Required** The ID of the profile to download.         |

Reviewer 3: Note that due to implementation concerns, the `id` is an `integer` or a `string` as it may represent an Apple profile ID (integer) or a Windows profile id (which is a UUID, a string). This was necessary given that the endpoint is platform-agnostic but internally the profiles are stored in different DB tables based on platform, and using numeric IDs for both would've created possibility of conflict (i.e. id 42 may be both an Apple or a Windows profile).

Author: @mna Makes sense to me. We have a similar thing [here](https://fleetdm.com/docs/rest-api/rest-api#:~:text=identifier-,integer%20or%20string,-path). I'll update the docs to reflect this.

Author: cc @noahtalerman

Reviewer: > the id is an integer or a string as it may represent an Apple profile ID (integer) or a Windows profile id (which is a UUID, a string)

If I'm understanding correctly, as a user using `GET /profiles/{id}` to retrieve a Windows profile, I'll have to use 

As a user using `GET /profiles/{id}` to retrieve a Windows profile, how will I know what UUID to use? Does Fleet give me a UUI

Reviewer: > internally the profiles are stored in different DB tables based on platform

Regarding the DB tables, @mna why can't macOS and Windows profiles live in the same table?

Reviewer 3: > why can't macOS and Windows profiles live in the same table?

We discussed the concerns of using the same table when we evaluated [the ticket](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/issues/14360) and opted to use different tables. The fact that the id is integer or string will be mostly transparent to users because whenever they list profiles, the `profile_id` field will contain that identifier. This is that identifier that must be provided here, it's just that in one case it is just digits and in windows' case it is alphanumeric+dashes (a uuid).

Reviewer: Hey @mna I don't think `id` v. UUID is mostly transparent to a user integrating w/ the API. They have to be aware that it's `id` for macOS and UUID.

Is it possible to give Windows profiles a "fake" integer `id` or macOS profiles a fake UUID? (now or later)

This way, a user integrating w/ the API doesn't have to know it's only `id` for macOS and UUID for Windows.

We want the API to have a consistent UX for macOS and Windows.

@marko-lisica heads up, I think this is different than the "Get host by identifier" endpoint. For this endpoint, you can use one of many identifiers to get a specific host. In this profiles case, it's specifically `id` for macOS and UUID for Windows.

Author: @noahtalerman I agree it would be better if we have the same experience for both platforms. I first thought it was related to the `<Replace>` (option) ID which should be UUID for Windows.

Reviewer 3: > I don't think id v. UUID is mostly transparent to a user integrating w/ the API. They have to be aware that it's id > for macOS and UUID.

@noahtalerman sorry, I must be explaining it poorly but it is mostly transparent - they don't need to be aware of the difference even if integrating with the API - they just pick the value of the `profile_id` field, no need to care or know that it is an ID or a UUID. Just pick the value and pass it along as `profile_id` for an API call related to this profile and it will work. The UX is consistent for both, it's almost an implementation detail (I say almost because of course if they print it, they'll notice one is e.g. `34` and the other is `ab12-ffe344-...`).

Author: We agreed on the solution that's described in the PR description.

> | alt                       | string  | query | If specified and set to "media", downloads the profile. |

Reviewer: Do we use `alt` for scripts? Is this consistent with other API endpoints?

Reviewer: More generally, why do we need the behavior in which `GET /profiles/{id}` returns information about the profile? Does the UI use this information?

Can we just have `GET /profiles/{id}` download the profile?

Author: > Do we use alt for scripts? Is this consistent with other API endpoints?

Yes, we use this approach for scripts already. See [here](https://fleetdm.com/docs/rest-api/rest-api#get-or-download-a-script).

>  Does the UI use this information?

No, we don't need this in UI right now. Same for scripts, but it's already implemented and might be useful at some point in the future. Here's some [discussion](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/issues/9829#issuecomment-1736138359) around `alt` for scripts API.

Should we keep it the same as for scripts and be consistent or remove it from profiles? What do you think @noahtalerman ?

Author: @mna We decided to match scripts, to have get or download (with `alt=media` param). This is specified in PR. For now it's just for profiles and we'll cover other endpoints later.

</plist>
```

### Delete custom OS setting (configuration profile)

> [Delete custom macOS setting](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/ee02782eaf84c121256d73abc20b949d31bf2e57/docs/REST%20API/rest-api.md#delete-custom-macos-setting-configuration-profile) (`DELETE /api/v1/fleet/mdm/apple/profiles/{profile_id}`) API endpoint is deprecated as of Fleet 4.41. It is maintained for backwards compatibility. Please use the below API endpoint instead.

`DELETE /api/v1/fleet/mdm/profiles/{id}`

#### Parameters

| Name                      | Type    | In    | Description                                                               |
| ------------------------- | ------- | ----- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | id                | integer | url   | **Required** The ID of the profile to delete.                             |

Reviewer 3: Same here, the profile ID can be integer or string (uuid).

</plist>
```

### Delete custom OS setting (configuration profile)

> > [Delete custom macOS setting](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/ee02782eaf84c121256d73abc20b949d31bf2e57/docs/REST%20API/rest-api.md#delete-custom-macos-setting-configuration-profile) (`DELETE /api/v1/fleet/mdm/apple/profiles/{profile_id}`) API endpoint is deprecated as of Fleet 4.40. It is maintained for backwards compatibility. Please use the API endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [Delete custom macOS setting](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/ee02782eaf84c121256d73abc20b949d31bf2e57/docs/REST%20API/rest-api.md#delete-custom-macos-setting-configuration-profile) (`DELETE /api/v1/fleet/mdm/apple/profiles/{profile_id}`) API endpoint is deprecated as of Fleet 4.41. It is maintained for backwards compatibility. Please use the below API endpoint instead.
```

</plist>
```

### Delete custom OS setting (configuration profile)

> > [Delete custom macOS setting](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/ee02782eaf84c121256d73abc20b949d31bf2e57/docs/REST%20API/rest-api.md#delete-custom-macos-setting-configuration-profile) (`DELETE /api/v1/fleet/mdm/apple/profiles/{profile_id}`) API endpoint is deprecated as of Fleet 4.41. It is maintained for backwards compatibility. Please use the below API endpoint instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> [Delete custom macOS setting](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/ee02782eaf84c121256d73abc20b949d31bf2e57/docs/REST%20API/rest-api.md#delete-custom-macos-setting-configuration-profile) (`DELETE /api/v1/fleet/mdm/apple/profiles/:profile_id`) API endpoint is deprecated as of Fleet 4.41. It is maintained for backwards compatibility. Please use the below API endpoint instead.
```

> `DELETE /api/v1/fleet/mdm/profiles/{profile_uuid}`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`DELETE /api/v1/fleet/mdm/profiles/:profile_uuid`
```

}
```

### Get OS settings status

> > [Get macOS settings statistics](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/ee02782eaf84c121256d73abc20b949d31bf2e57/docs/REST%20API/rest-api.md#get-macos-settings-statistics) (`GET /api/v1/fleet/mdm/apple/profiles/summary`) API endpoint is deprecated as of Fleet 4.40. It is maintained for backwards compatibility. Please use the API endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [Get macOS settings statistics](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/ee02782eaf84c121256d73abc20b949d31bf2e57/docs/REST%20API/rest-api.md#get-macos-settings-statistics) (`GET /api/v1/fleet/mdm/apple/profiles/summary`) API endpoint is deprecated as of Fleet 4.41. It is maintained for backwards compatibility. Please use the below API endpoint instead.
```

Get aggregate status counts of all OS settings (configuration profiles and disk encryption) enforced on hosts.

For Fleet Premium users, the counts can

> optionally be filtered by team id. If no team id is specified, team profiles are excluded from the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
optionally be filtered by `team_id`. If no `team_id` is specified, team profiles are excluded from the
```

I think we want to start using `team_id` or team ID right?

Author: That's right. Thanks for noticing.

#### Example

> Get aggregate status counts of MDM profiles applying to macOS and Windows hosts enrolled to Fleet that are not assigned to any team.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Get aggregate status counts of profiles for to macOS and Windows hosts that are assigned to "No team".
```

Are there other places we can simplify the language like this?

Author: Do you mean other places using '**_not assigned to any team_**'? If yes, there are many places using this wording.

Reviewer: Ah, ok. Let's wait to make this change in other places then (we can still make it here).

I added an item to product design sync so we can decide and then make a change (if we decide to).

Reviewer: @marko-lisica I tweaked my suggestion above to use language like “not assigned to any team.”

I think we can commit the suggestion.

{
  "profiles": [
    {

>       "profile_uuid": 39f6cbbc-fe7b-4adc-b7a9-542d1af89c63,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      "profile_uuid": "39f6cbbc-fe7b-4adc-b7a9-542d1af89c63",
```

      "team_id": 0,
      "name": "Example macOS profile",
      "platform": "darwin",
      "identifier": "com.example.profile",
      "created_at": "2023-03-31T00:00:00Z",
      "updated_at": "2023-03-31T00:00:00Z",
      "checksum": "dGVzdAo="
    },
    {
      "profile_uuid": f5ad01cc-f416-4b5f-88f3-a26da3b56a19,
      "team_id": 0,
      "name": "Example Windows profile",
      "platform": "windows",
      "created_at": "2023-04-31T00:00:00Z",
      "updated_at": "2023-04-31T00:00:00Z",
      "checksum": "aCLemVr)"
    }
  ],
  "meta": {
    "has_next_results": false,
    "has_previous_results": false
  }
}
```

### Get or download custom OS setting (configuration profile)

> > [Download custom macOS setting](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/ee02782eaf84c121256d73abc20b949d31bf2e57/docs/REST%20API/rest-api.md#download-custom-macos-setting-configuration-profile) (`GET /api/v1/fleet/mdm/apple/profiles/:profile_id`) API endpoint is deprecated as of Fleet 4.41. It is maintained for backwards compatibility. Please use the below API endpoint instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> [Download custom macOS setting](https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/blob/ee02782eaf84c121256d73abc20b949d31bf2e57/docs/REST%20API/rest-api.md#download-custom-macos-setting-configuration-profile) (`GET /api/v1/fleet/mdm/apple/profiles/:profile_id`) API endpoint is deprecated as of Fleet 4.41. It is maintained for backwards compatibility. Please use the API endpoint below instead.
```
